Best practices for using feature flag systems article (#7389)
Unleash/unleash: website/docs/topics/feature-flags/best-practices-using-feature-flags-at-scale.md

- [Common pitfalls to avoid when implementing flags at scale](#common-pitfalls-to-avoid-when-implementing-flags-at-scale)
  - [11. Avoid feature flag parent-child dependencies.](#11-avoid-feature-flag-parent-child-dependencies)
  - [12. Don’t use flags to manage configuration.](#12-dont-use-flags-to-manage-configuration)
  - [13. Never reuse feature flag names.](#13-never-reuse-feature-flag-names)
  - [14. Avoid giant feature flag targeting lists.](#14-avoid-giant-feature-flag-targeting-lists)
  - [15. Do not define business logic using feature flags.](#15-do-not-define-business-logic-using-feature-flags)
- [Staying sane while managing feature flags at scale](#staying-sane-while-managing-feature-flags-at-scale)

## Organizing your team and internal processes to support feature flags

Before you add your first feature flag, you need to think about how organizational structure and processes that live outside of code will affect your feature flag deployments.

### 1. Align feature flags with organizational and application design.

> Any organization that designs a system will produce a design whose structure is a copy of the organization's communication structure.

– Melvin Conway

> <Figure img="/img/feature-flag-organization-methods.png" caption="In situtations where predefined teams own a feature from start to finish, it makes sense to create a project for each team. In situtations where you have dynamic teams that form around feature work, you might instead want to create smaller projects for each feature, only giving access to the people who work on that feature."/>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Figure img="/img/feature-flag-orginization-methods.png" caption="In situtations where predefined teams own a feature from start to finish, it makes sense to create a project for each team. In situtations where you have dynamic teams that form around feature work, you might instead want to create smaller projects for each feature, only giving access to the people who work on that feature."/>
```

Reviewer: @ferrantim You've put a typo in the file name of this one, so the image wasn't loading correctly. I can't easily change the file name, but I can update the reference. Not super important, but I suggest you go and update the file name and the reference later.

Embedding business logic within feature flags can make the codebase unnecessarily complex. Business rules can become scattered and entangled with feature flagging logic, making the code harder to read, understand, and maintain. When changes are needed, developers might have to navigate through a labyrinth of feature flags to find and update the relevant logic, increasing the risk of introducing bugs.

#### Performance Implications

Feature flags are typically designed to be checked frequently and quickly, with minimal performance overhead. However, when feature flags are used to control business logic, [they may involve more complex evaluations and data fetching, which can degrade application performance](#14-avoid-giant-feature-flag-targeting-lists). This is particularly problematic for high-traffic applications where performance is critical.

#### Security Risks

Business logic often involves access controls and entitlements. Using feature flags to manage these aspects can expose security vulnerabilities if not handled correctly. Feature flags might be toggled accidentally or maliciously, leading to unauthorized access or exposure of sensitive data.

> ## Staying sane while managing feature flags at scale

Reviewer: I'd avoid using terms related to sanity in writing (for ableism reasons). Can we rephrase this to something else? What about this?

```suggestion
## Keeping cool while managing feature flags at scale
```

This also applies in the text, by the way.

> These best practices come from working with many of the largest organizations on the planet. We’ve learned that staying sane while managing feature flags at scale requires careful planning, thoughtful organization, and adherence to several best practices. By aligning feature flags with organizational structure, making flags searchable, and managing permissions effectively, you can maintain a clean and efficient system that sets you up for success from the start. Instrumenting your code correctly and regularly paying down technical debt helps maintain performance and security. Finally, avoiding common pitfalls, such as using feature flags for business logic or configuration management, keeps your system robust and manageable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These best practices come from working with many of the largest organizations on the planet. We’ve learned that keeping cool while managing feature flags at scale requires careful planning, thoughtful organization, and adherence to several best practices. By aligning feature flags with organizational structure, making flags searchable, and managing permissions effectively, you can maintain a clean and efficient system that sets you up for success from the start. Instrumenting your code correctly and regularly paying down technical debt helps maintain performance and security. Finally, avoiding common pitfalls, such as using feature flags for business logic or configuration management, keeps your system robust and manageable.
```

---
title: 15 Principles for Using Feature Flag Systems at Scale
---

import Figure from '@site/src/components/Figure/Figure.tsx'

“A feature flag is just an if statement,” you say. This is true in a way, but when your organization has thousands of developers, each managing dozens or hundreds of flags with complex targeting rules and audit trails across dozens of microservices-based applications, those if statements can quickly become complex. This is especially true if you don’t set up your system correctly in the first place.

> This guide to using feature flag systems at scale is based on lessons learned working with some of the largest feature flag deployments in the world through the [Unleash Open-Source](https://github.com/Unleash/unleash) and [Enterprise Feature Management platform](https://www.getunleash.io/enterprise-feature-management-platform). However, the principles outlined do not apply only to Unleash. They apply to any large-scale feature flag system, including one you build yourself or another commercial solution.  For tips on how to stand up and run a feature flag system, see our [principles for building and scaling feature flags](https://docs.getunleash.io/topics/feature-flags/feature-flag-best-practices).

Reviewer: The intra-doc link should point to the file.

```suggestion
This guide to using feature flag systems at scale is based on lessons learned working with some of the largest feature flag deployments in the world through the [Unleash Open-Source](https://github.com/Unleash/unleash) and [Enterprise Feature Management platform](https://www.getunleash.io/enterprise-feature-management-platform). However, the principles outlined do not apply only to Unleash. They apply to any large-scale feature flag system, including one you build yourself or another commercial solution.  For tips on how to stand up and run a feature flag system, see our [principles for building and scaling feature flags](feature-flag-best-practices.md).
```

Users should be shown information about any flags related to their work, whether on a team, an application, a product, or a project basis. This includes inspecting the flag’s configuration and tracking updates to the flag.

Achieve this by grouping related flags together based on the most appropriate level of abstraction. If you work on static teams that see a feature through from start to finish, group flags by team. If you form project-based teams, group flags by project.

Taken to the extreme, you might be tempted to put all flags into one giant group. Avoid that temptation because it will create permission complexities and information overload.

In an organization that actively uses feature flags, there will invariably be a large number of flags and an even larger number of changes made to those flags. This can quickly become overwhelming and a user may end up losing track of updates that are important to them. 

Removing information and updates you don’t care about makes the things you care about stand out that much more. 

> Example: Do all members of Team A need updates on Project X, even if only one member of Team A is working on it? If so, include all team members in Project X’s group. Otherwise, only include the member who works on project X. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Example**: Do all members of Team A need updates on Project X, even if only one member of Team A is working on it? If so, include all team members in Project X’s group. Otherwise, only include the member who works on project X. 
```

### 2. Make flags searchable globally.

> Modern applications are composed of multiple services with many complex dependencies. While you should try to organize your flags based on high-level abstractions such as applications, teams, or business units, many services cut across these artificial organizing principles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While you should try to organize your flags based on high-level abstractions such as applications, teams, or business units, many services cut across these artificial organizing principles.
```

Just because a user might need to interact with a flag does not mean you should display it by default when it is outside your main organizational parameters. However, all flags should be easily searchable. When a user finds one, they should be able to inspect its configuration and ownership so that they might request additional permissions or [submit change requests for approval](#6-implement-flag-approval-workflows-early).

> This is why feature flag systems should be [open by default](https://docs.getunleash.io/topics/feature-flags/democratize-feature-flag-access).  There are valid use cases for excluding flags from global search. For example, a public company in the middle of an acquisition where exposing flags related to the website or app changes might breach regulatory guidelines.  Your feature flag system should accommodate these private projects; however, they should be the exception, not the rule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is why feature flag systems should be [open by default](feature-flag-best-practices.md#9-choose-open-by-default-democratize-feature-flag-access).  There are valid use cases for excluding flags from global search. For example, a public company in the middle of an acquisition where exposing flags related to the website or app changes might breach regulatory guidelines.  Your feature flag system should accommodate these private projects; however, they should be the exception, not the rule.
```

This is also often the case for B2B companies where specific customers request certain functionality. A Customer Success Manager will often have better insight into to whom to roll out a new feature first.

To be clear, the developers should still be kept in the loop (after all, when was the last time your Customer Success Managers checked system logs?). However, the flags are now a shared responsibility, and other team members should be given the power and responsibility to make the changes they want to see.

Here are common examples that require updating flag permissions you should plan for: 

* Permissions are wrongly scoped. Someone was left out, or someone who should not have access does.
* Requirements changed mid-project. 
* The project owner or team lead changed.
* Teams are reorganized.

> * The flag lifecycle stage dictates changes in the owners

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

The flag lifecycle stage dictates changes in the owners.
```

Review flag changes before they take effect

Even if you don’t require anyone else's approval before making changes in production environments, there are still benefits to grouping your changes together and reviewing them before actually making them:

1. You can make multiple changes at the same time. If you have a set of changes across flags that should change in tandem, you can make sure they update at the same time, avoiding awkward in-between states.
2. You avoid making changes by mistake. If your cat walks across the keyboard, you can feel safe that they won’t accidentally expose your unfinished code to everyone. 
3. You get to review the changes before they go out. You get the full overview of the changes you’re making. You can double-check that the changes will have the effect you want.

## Instrumenting your code and managing flag lifecycle

Flags live in code, and hundreds of small choices go into instrumenting flags into that code.  Here are some tips we’ve picked up to improve the maintainability and performance of large-scale feature flag systems.

### 7. Define flags in your code at the highest level of abstraction.

> ![evaluate-flags-high-in-code](https://github.com/ferrantim/unleash/assets/3068350/d355080c-3537-4106-ac7b-3a761ce3ac50)

Reviewer: Assuming the images has moved to `/img/evaluate-flags-at-the-edge.png`

```suggestion
<Figure img="/img/evaluate-flags-at-the-edge.png" caption="Instead of evaluating a flag in a back-end service and then dynamically changing the behavior in that service (either by calling out to other services or changing how the service works), consider evaluating the flag as far out in the stack as you can and deciding which service to call based on the flag value."/>
```

Here are a few examples of functionality managed by feature flags and where you should try to evaluate in your code:

* Recommendation Engine: When testing changes to the recommendation algorithm, evaluating the feature flag close to the recommendation module allows focused testing and isolation of the changes.
* Database Query Optimization: Evaluating the flag near the optimized query simplifies testing and ensures the change behaves as expected within that specific query.
* Third-Party Integrations: If a feature flag controls the integration with a third-party service, evaluating it near the integration code helps isolate the behavior changes. This simplifies testing the interaction with the third-party service based on the flag state, without affecting other integrations in the system.
* Cache Invalidation Logic: When modifying code that invalidates cache entries based on a feature flag, evaluating the flag near that logic allows for focused testing of the cache invalidation behavior. This isolates the test from other parts of the system that could potentially interact with the cache.

### 8. Evaluate a feature flag only once.

> ![evaluate-flags-only-once](https://github.com/ferrantim/unleash/assets/3068350/2c8ffe74-7972-429f-a0be-adcb045a2836)

Reviewer: I think this image came out pretty nice in the end 😄 

Same thing as for previous images: move it to the docs repo and give it a caption. 

I'm assuming you've called it `/img/evaluate-flags-only-once.png`:

```suggestion
<Figure img="/img/evaluate-flags-only-once.png" caption="You should evaluate flags only once in a chain of services and pass the result on to the next service in the chain if it needs the value. If you evaluate the flag in each service, you risk the flag value changing between each service, causing unexpected results."/>
```

When building new (often complex) features for users, systems require changes across multiple parts – modules within an application or services in a microservices architecture. While it's tempting to use a single feature flag to control all these changes and evaluate it locally in each module, we recommend against it for a few reasons:

* Unpredictable Timing: User requests flow through the system and touch different parts as they progress. Between each invocation, time passes. Even with perfectly synchronized feature flags, requests will hit different system parts at slightly different times. This means the flag state could change between evaluations, leading to inconsistent behavior for the user.

> * Laws of distributed computing: Particularly in distributed systems, we cannot assume all parts of the system are perfectly synchronized, as networks are unreliable and can experience transient errors at any time. Feature flag systems generally [prefer availability over consistency](https://docs.getunleash.io/topics/feature-flags/availability-over-consistency). By only evaluating a feature flag once, we guarantee a consistent experience for our users. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Laws of distributed computing: Particularly in distributed systems, we cannot assume all parts of the system are perfectly synchronized, as networks are unreliable and can experience transient errors at any time. Feature flag systems generally [prefer availability over consistency](feature-flag-best-practices.md#6-design-for-failure-favor-availability-over-consistency). By only evaluating a feature flag once, we guarantee a consistent experience for our users. 
```

However, you should be careful when introducing these dependencies, as it increases the complexity of everyone interacting with the feature flag system. It's no longer enough to consider the configuration of a single flag, you also need to consider the configuration of the parent. It's easy to cause confusion, leading to accidentally enabling or disabling a feature in production 

To keep complexity down, we generally advise not to have complex targeting rules for both the parent and the child flag simultaneously. This can make it harder to achieve consistency for end users. It also increases the complexity for the user of the feature flag system. For example, if both the parent and the child are configured to a 50% rollout, are you then exposing the feature to 50% or 25% of the user base? The answer is that it depends on the identifier used to roll the flag out.

### 12. Don’t use flags to manage configuration.

> Both feature flags and configuration settings control an application’s behavior. However, it's crucial to distinguish between feature flagging systems and configuration management systems and use each for its intended purpose.  Otherwise, you risk management nightmares and security vulnerabilities

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both feature flags and configuration settings control an application’s behavior. However, it's crucial to distinguish between feature flagging systems and configuration management systems and use each for its intended purpose.
```

> Feature flags are intended for dynamic and temporary use, giving you [runtime control](https://docs.getunleash.io/topics/feature-flags/runtime-control) to enable or disable functionality in a live environment. This flexibility supports [short-lived experiments](https://docs.getunleash.io/topics/feature-flags/short-lived-feature-flags), such as A/B testing or gradual rollouts, instead of relying on configuration settings that require an application redeploy to take effect. Despite the ease of turning off and on features or functionality with feature flags, they should not be repurposed for managing configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Feature flags are intended for dynamic and temporary use, giving you [runtime control](https://docs.getunleash.io/topics/feature-flags/runtime-control) to enable or disable functionality in a live environment. This flexibility supports [short-lived experiments](https://docs.getunleash.io/topics/feature-flags/short-lived-feature-flags), such as A/B testing or gradual rollouts, instead of relying on configuration settings that require an application redeploy to take effect.
```

I know this is a debate, but I saw examples where feature flags were great for things like configuring logs or putting an application into maintenance mode, which are in a way "a configuration."

Reviewer: This is a good point, that maybe we should change. I'd consider those "dynamic configuration", for which flags *are* great and not necessarily something we discourage. You might want to increase the amount of logging in a running app if something appears to be going wrong, and similarly you might want to turn on maintenance mode without restarting. I think those are entirely valid use cases and would say that flags are a good solution for that. 

So maybe we should just add those as good examples of using flags for *dynamic* configuration.

Author: Gonna leave for now.  That is the spirit of the section and I think it is explained well, at least for me.

> Feature flags are intended for dynamic and temporary use, giving you [runtime control](https://docs.getunleash.io/topics/feature-flags/runtime-control) to enable or disable functionality in a live environment. This flexibility supports [short-lived experiments](https://docs.getunleash.io/topics/feature-flags/short-lived-feature-flags), such as A/B testing or gradual rollouts, instead of relying on configuration settings that require an application redeploy to take effect. Despite the ease of turning off and on features or functionality with feature flags, they should not be repurposed for managing configuration.

Reviewer: the links here also need to be updated (as a separate point to Alvin's):

```suggestion
Feature flags are intended for dynamic and temporary use, giving you [runtime control](feature-flag-best-practices#1-enable-run-time-control-control-flags-dynamically-not-using-config-files) to enable or disable functionality in a live environment. This flexibility supports [short-lived experiments](feature-flag-best-practices#7-make-feature-flags-short-lived-do-not-confuse-flags-with-application-configuration), such as A/B testing or gradual rollouts, instead of relying on configuration settings that require an application redeploy to take effect. Despite the ease of turning off and on features or functionality with feature flags, they should not be repurposed for managing configuration.
```

A dedicated config management system should manage long-term configuration settings. These systems are designed to handle sensitive information such as API keys and access credentials securely, unlike feature flag systems, which typically do not encrypt flag states. Misusing feature flags for configuration can lead to security risks and management complexities.

> A good rule of thumb is that if the data is static (you don’t expect it to change without restarting your application), needs encryption, or contains PII (Personal Identifiable Information), it’s probably better suited for your Configuration management system than a feature flag system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A good rule of thumb is that if the data needs encryption, or contains PII (Personal Identifiable Information), it’s probably better suited for your Configuration management system than a feature flag system.
```

> <table>

Reviewer: Agree with this. this feels short enough that a md table could work just as well. And if we wanna stick with html, we should consider reformatting this to make it easier to read with indentation etc.

> <table>

Author: leaving as html for now.

  <tr>
   <td>Configuration system
   </td>
   <td>Feature flag system
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>Is: Long-lived, static during runtime
   </td>
   <td>Is: Short-lived, changes during runtime
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>Examples of things to update with the config system: 
<ul>

<li>Database or server credentials

<li>Server port

<li>CORS headers

<li>API base URL

<li>SSO setup
</li>
</ul>
   </td>
   <td>Examples of things to update with feature flag system:
<ul>

<li>Dark mode/light mode

<li>Stable / Beta feature

<li>New or old algorithm

<li>A/B test
</li>
</ul>
   </td>
  </tr>
</table>

### 13. Never reuse feature flag names.

> Feature flag names need to be globally unique.  [We wrote about this before](https://docs.getunleash.io/topics/feature-flags/unique-names), but it is such an important point that it bears repeating. Every feature flag within the same Feature Flag Control service must have a unique name across the cluster to prevent inconsistencies and errors.

Reviewer: This isn't a good link title because it requires context to understand what it points to. Consider something like this instead. Also, whenever you link to other docs, you should link directly to the file, not to the URL, as explained in the [docusaurus markdown links](https://docusaurus.io/docs/markdown-features/links) article. In particular, this means the build will break if the doc doesn't exist anymore instead of the build succeeding but the link giving you a 404.

```suggestion
We've said it before, but we'll say it again: [Feature flag names need to be globally unique](feature-flags-best-practices.md#8-use-unique-names-across-all-applications-enforce-naming-conventions). Every feature flag within the same Feature Flag Control service must have a unique name across the cluster to prevent inconsistencies and errors.
```

> In a perfect world, all references to feature flags in code would be cleaned up as soon as the feature flag is archived.  But we don’t live in a perfect world. You will save yourself many hours of frustration and potential downtime if you use unique names to protect new features from being accidentally linked to outdated flags, which could inadvertently expose old features. [Unique names should ideally be enforced during flag creation](https://docs.getunleash.io/reference/feature-flag-naming-patterns).

Reviewer: This intra-doc link should also be updated to point to the "physical" md file.
```suggestion
In a perfect world, all references to feature flags in code would be cleaned up as soon as the feature flag is archived.  But we don’t live in a perfect world. You will save yourself many hours of frustration and potential downtime if you use unique names to protect new features from being accidentally linked to outdated flags, which could inadvertently expose old features. [Unique names should ideally be enforced during flag creation](../../reference/feature-flag-naming-patterns.mdx).
```

### 15. Do not define business logic using feature flags.

In our experience, since feature flags reduce the friction of releasing software, teams who adopt feature flags tend to use them more and more.  This is a good thing as long as archived flags are removed from the code base keeping tech debt down. You should resist, however, the temptation to codify core business logic inside feature flags, the same way you should [resist wrapping application configuration in feature flags](#12-dont-use-flags-to-manage-configuration).

Here is a good rule of thumb: Experiment with business logic using feature flags.  But once you have established the business logic, codify it in code that lives outside of a flag.

For example, if you want to determine whether premium users of your product will use a certain new feature, you can wrap it in a flag and measure the result. Once you have determined that premium users do use the feature, and that all premium users should have access to it, however, you should remove the flag and add the feature to your entitlement service.

If feature flags are so great, why shouldn’t you use them for business logic? A few reasons:

> *Dependency on 3rd party services*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Dependency on 3rd party services
```

Coming from a feature flag vendor, it might surprise you that we do not advocate making core business logic dependent on a 3rd party feature flag service. If that flag service is down, then your app could potentially cease to function in the way designed.  This applies to using 3rd party feature flag services, as well as home grown feature flags service. 

> *Complexity and Maintainability*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Complexity and Maintainability
```

Embedding business logic within feature flags can make the codebase unnecessarily complex. Business rules can become scattered and entangled with feature flagging logic, making the code harder to read, understand, and maintain. When changes are needed, developers might have to navigate through a labyrinth of feature flags to find and update the relevant logic, increasing the risk of introducing bugs.

> *Performance Implications*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Performance Implications
```

Feature flags are typically designed to be checked frequently and quickly, with minimal performance overhead. However, when feature flags are used to control business logic, [they may involve more complex evaluations and data fetching, which can degrade application performance](#14-avoid-giant-feature-flag-targeting-lists). This is particularly problematic for high-traffic applications where performance is critical.

> *Security Risks*

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Security Risks
```

Feature flags are a powerful tool for delivering software efficiently while maintaining security and compliance.  For developers working in large organizations, that is the best of both worlds. By following the best practices outlined in this guide, you can harness the full potential of feature flags while avoiding the complexities and risks associated with their misuse.

Remember, the key to successful feature flag management at scale lies in clear processes, regular maintenance, and a commitment to best practices. With these in place, you can leverage feature flags to drive innovation and improve your software development lifecycle.

> This guide was all about using feature flags at scale. For similar tips on building and scaling the feature flag system itself, see our [feature flag best practices guide](https://docs.getunleash.io/topics/feature-flags/feature-flag-best-practices).

Reviewer: Update the link:

```suggestion
This guide was all about using feature flags at scale. For similar tips on building and scaling the feature flag system itself, see our [feature flag best practices guide](feature-flag-best-practices.md).
```

A dedicated config management system should manage long-term configuration settings. These systems are designed to handle sensitive information such as API keys and access credentials securely, unlike feature flag systems, which typically do not encrypt flag states. Misusing feature flags for configuration can lead to security risks and management complexities.

A good rule of thumb is that if the data is static (you don’t expect it to change without restarting your application), needs encryption, or contains PII (Personal Identifiable Information), it’s probably better suited for your Configuration management system than a feature flag system.

> <table>
>   <tr>
>    <td>Configuration system
>    </td>
>    <td>Feature flag system
>    </td>
>   </tr>
>   <tr>
>    <td>Is: Long-lived, static during runtime
>    </td>
>    <td>Is: Short-lived, changes during runtime
>    </td>
>   </tr>
>   <tr>
>    <td>Examples of things to update with the config system: 
> <ul>
> 
> <li>Database or server credentials
> 
> <li>Server port
> 
> <li>CORS headers
> 
> <li>API base URL
> 
> <li>SSO setup
> </li>
> </ul>
>    </td>
>    <td>Examples of things to update with feature flag system:
> <ul>
> 
> <li>Dark mode/light mode
> 
> <li>Stable / Beta feature
> 
> <li>New or old algorithm
> 
> <li>A/B test
> </li>
> </ul>
>    </td>
>   </tr>
> </table>

Reviewer: The formatting here is off and it's breaking the build. Replacing with a new version.

```suggestion
<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Configuration system</th>
    <th>Feature flag system</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Is: Long-lived, static during runtime</td>
    <td>Is: Short-lived, changes during runtime</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>
      Examples of things to update with the config system:
      <ul>
        <li>Database or server credentials</li>
        <li>Server port</li>
        <li>CORS headers</li>
        <li>API base URL</li>
        <li>SSO setup</li>
      </ul>
    </td>
    <td>
      Examples of things to update with feature flag system:
      <ul>
        <li>Dark mode / light mode</li>
        <li>Stable/Beta feature</li>
        <li>New or old algorithm</li>
        <li>A/B test</li>
      </ul>
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>
```
